---
layout: post
title: "Who’s who in rare disease research: predicting expertise from
publication history"
author: "Zihan Wang"
supervisors: "Orion Buske and Professor
Michael Brudno"
category: "Artificial Intelligence"
permalink: /artificial-intelligence/predicting-expertise-from-publication-history
year: "2016"
---

Introduction 
============

Rare diseases affect over 350 million people worldwide, 50% of which are
children [1, 2]. Because each disease is rare, a general physician
may have never seen a patient with a particular disease in their entire
career [3]. Symptoms can also vary considerably between individual
cases, making correct diagnosis difficult [4]. Misdiagnosis and
incorrect treatment are extremely costly and potentially dangerous, so
it is important to quickly refer patients to specialists that are
experts in their condition. To facilitate this referral process, we
trained machine learning models to predict the expertise of each
researcher in each rare disease, based on their publication record. We
compared the performance of three methods on a dataset of 209,110
disease-author associations, and were able to classify rare disease
experts from GeneReviews with 76% accuracy and predict 21,224 new
disease-expert associations.

Approach 
========

We hypothesized that it is possible to distinguish experts from
non-experts in a particular disease based on their publication record
for that disease. The more frequently a researcher publishes on a
disease, the more likely they are to be an expert.

To test this hypothesis, we compiled a data set of 2,160 known
disease-expert associations and 206,950 unknown disease-author
associations, based on the authorship of publications associated with
rare diseases (see Figure 1). Rather than attempt to
identify whether or not a disease is the topic of an article based on
its abstract, we obtained a curated list of associated publications for
each rare disease from OMIM, an online catalog of rare inherited
diseases [5]. Known disease-expert associations were obtained from
GeneReviews, a resource with high-quality peer-reviewed summaries of a
variety of inherited conditions [6]. GeneReviews chapters are written by
one or more experts and focus on a specific condition or disease. The
positive disease-expert associations from GeneReviews publications were
combined with the unlabeled disease-author associations from OMIM to
form the complete data set.

<p style="text-align: center;">
	<img style="margin:50" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/wz-fig1.png"/>
</p>

<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Figure 1:</b> Data analysis workflow. </p>

To combine these data sets, author names needed to be extracted from
both OMIM references and GeneReviews articles and then merged, and
GeneReviews articles needed to be linked to diseases in OMIM. The
formatting of author names differed between OMIM and GeneReviews, so we
used the combination of the full last name, first initial, and middle
initial (if present) to uniquely identify an author. We identified
98,705 unique authors, with 1,724 having published in both GeneReviews
and articles included in OMIM. GeneReviews chapters frequently include a
table of OMIM identifiers, with 95% of the 664 chapters we analyzed
linking to one or more OMIM records. The GeneReview authors were
considered to be experts in each linked OMIM record if they had at least
one other publication associated with that OMIM record. Unlabeled
disease-author associations were taken from the 1,292 OMIM records with
at least one associated GeneReview article. OMIM records can correspond
to either diseases or disease-associated genes, but we did not
distinguish these cases.

|Model         |Precision   |Recall      |Accuracy    |F1          |
|:------------:|:----------:|:----------:|:----------:|:----------:|
|<b>SVM</b>    |<b>0.76</b> |0.76        |<b>0.76</b> |<b>0.76</b> |
|Random Forest |0.72        |<b>0.78</b> |0.74        |0.75        |
|Naive Bayes   |0.75        |0.65        |0.72        |0.70        |

<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Table 1:</b> The classification performance of different learning algorithms</p>

We designed 8 features to discriminate the disease-author associations
of experts from non-experts: 1) number of publications by the author on
the disease, 2) standardized number of publications by the author on the
disease (zero mean and unit variance across authors per disease), 3)
number of diseases that the author has published on, 4) number of
first-author publications by the author on the disease, 5) number of
last-author publications by the author on the disease, and the number of
publications by the author on the disease in the last 6) 3 years, 7) 5
years, and 8) 10 years.

We trained three learning algorithms, an SVM classifier [7], Random
Forest [8] and naive Bayes [9], on the 2,160 positive disease-expert
associations and 2,160 randomly-selected unlabeled disease-author
associations which served as negative examples. We averaged the
performance across ten separate iterations of 10-fold cross-validation,
each with a different randomly selected set of negative examples.

Analysis
========

The SVM classifier outperformed the other methods in accuracy,
precision, and F1 measure, with both precision and recall of 76% (see
Table 1). The Random Forest and naive Bayes models
performed slightly worse, though the naive Bayes model achieved higher
recall than the SVM (78%).


Most disease-author associations were confidently classified by the SVM,
and misclassified cases were often confidently misclassified (see
Figure 2). While the SVM classifier scored most
negative disease-author associations below 0.2, some associations were
scored very highly. We used unlabeled associations as negative examples
under the assumption that most authors that have published on a disease
are not experts in that disease. However, a substantial fraction of
these unlabeled associations will represent real expertise where the
author has simply not published in GeneReviews. The classifier predicted
21,224 disease-expert associations out of 206,950 unlabeled associations
(10%).

<p style="text-align: center;">
	<img style="margin:50" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/wz-figure2.png"/>
</p>
<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Figure 2:</b> Distributions of the posterior probability from the SVM classifier for positive (left) and negative (right) test data during one iteration of cross-validation. </p>

Conclusion
==========

Using an SVM model, we were able to accurately predict the disease
expertise of researchers based on features extracted from their
publication history. This method can improve the referral of patients to
rare disease specialists, thereby reducing the time to eventual
diagnosis. Additionally, this method can be used to suggest journal
reviewers or conference invitees where expertise in a specific disease
is desired. In future work, we plan to incorporate author disambiguation
to improve the accuracy of the author publication history. This work
also depends on the accuracy and completeness of OMIM’s curated
references, which could be augmented by using text mining to
automatically identify publications associated with rare diseases.

### References

1. Rare Disease Day 2016 - 29 Feb - Article.http://www.rarediseaseday.org/article/what-is-a-rare-disease. Accessed: 2016-08-22. 

2. J. Mendlovic,  H. Barash,  H. Yardeni,  Y. Banet-Levi,  H. Yonath,  and A. Raas-Rothschild.   Rare  diseases  DTC:  Diagnosis,  treatment  and  care. Harefuah,155(4):241–253, 2016.

3. Rare  diseases  strategy  -  Publications  -  GOV.UK.https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/rare-diseases-strategy.   Accessed:   2016-08-22. 

4.  H. Singh, T. Giardina, A. Meyer, S. Forjuoh, M. Reis, and E. Thomas. Types and origins of diagnostic errors in primary care settings. JAMA Internal Medicine, 173(6):418, 2013. 

5. Joanna S Amberger, Carol A Bocchini, Franc ̧ois Schiettecatte, Alan F Scott, andAda Hamosh.  OMIM.org:  Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIMR©), anonline catalog of human genes and genetic disorders. Nucleic acids research, 43(D1):D789–D798, 2015

6. Roberta A Pagon. GeneReviews. University of Washington, 1993. 

7. Ting-Fan  Wu,  Chih-Jen  Lin,  and  Ruby  C  Weng.    Probability  estimates  formulti-class  classification  by  pairwise  coupling. Journal  of  Machine  Learning Research, 5(Aug):975–1005, 2004.

8. Leo Breiman. Random forests. Machine learning, 45(1):5–32, 2001.

9. Harry Zhang. Exploring   conditions   for   the   optimality   of   naive Bayes. International   Journal   of   Pattern   Recognition   and   Artificial   Intelligence, 19(02):183–198, 2005. 

