---
layout: post
title: "Representing Constraints and Complex Dynamics in Goal Models"
author: "Gary Song"
supervisors: "Alicia Grubb and Professor Marsha Chechik"
category: "Software Engineering"
permalink: /software-engineering/constraints-and-complex-dynamics
---

Introduction
====

Software project stakeholders have project requirements that revolve
around large, abstract goals. These requirements can be represented
through goal models, where they can be decomposed into alternatives with
related tasks and dependencies. In the example shown in Figure 1, the
stakeholder is a city wishing to build new infrastructure.

Shown using the iStar modelling Language \[1\], all elements on the
graph are either actors or intentions (i.e., goals, soft-goals, tasks,
or resources). Each intention has a satisfaction value to represent its
current state. The satisfaction of a goal can be decomposed into
sub-goals or tasks. Intentions are connected through relationships. In
the example below, the city is considering how to *Manage City Waste*
and has decomposed this decision into two tasks using a “or”
relationship. Thus if one of the two tasks - *Use Current Dump* or *Use
New Dump* - is satisfied, which it is, then the goal *Manage City Waste*
will also be satisfied during analysis.

<p style="text-align: center;">
<img style="margin:50" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/gs-fig1.png"/>
</p>

<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Figure 1:</b> City goal model</p>

GrowingLeaf is a web-based goal modelling tool that enables reasoning
about changing satisfaction levels over time by identifying intention
dynamics. Once stakeholders have represented actors, intentions (with
dynamics), relationships and constraints using the iStar goal modeling
notation \[1\], our analysis processes the graph and maps each intention
to a sequence of satisfaction values. The exact value that each
intention takes on is determined by the current time point. The user can
move through these time points to reveal broader patterns of intention
satisfaction. Problems with the model – such as unacceptable states, or
some goals never being satisfied – also become apparent. GrowingLeaf
allows stakeholders to discover these hidden issues in their goal model
during early phase engineering. These problems can be resolved by
tweaking the graph at hand and, in turn, creating a stronger model for
the stakeholder’s project.

Approach
====

In our previous work \[2\], we built a beta version of our tool to draw
and evaluate goal models. We also introduced the concept of dynamic
functions to represent temporal changes in the satisfaction value of
intentions. Within each intention, the satisfaction value is determined
through a time function \[3\]. For example, the user can specify that
Task\_A is initially denied (D) and becomes satisfied (S) from some time
point “A” onwards (see Figure 2A).

<p style="text-align: center;">
<img style="margin:50" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/gs-fig2.png"/>
</p>

<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Figure 2:</b> Task A (left) and Task B (right)</p>

We extended our previous work by allowing users to specify their own
time functions (see Figure 2B). This enables the modelling of intentions
with complex patterns of satisfaction. To model cyclical behavior, a
subset of the users specified time function can be selected to repeat.

Additionally, we introduced the concept of temporal constraints between
intentions. This is represented using a new link type. For example,
Task\_A (see Figure 2A) transitions from denied to satisfied at time
“A”. Task\_B follows a more complex time function that is specified by
the user (see Figure 2B). These two intentions can then be connected by
a constraint link, specifying that time “A” for Task\_A happens before
time “C” for Task\_B, as shown in Figure 3.

<p style="text-align: center;">
<img style="margin:50" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/gs-fig3.png"/>
</p>

<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Figure 3:</b> Between intention constraints</p>

However, adding constraints to the graphical model made it difficult for
users to distinguish between model relationships and constraints. To
mitigate this issue, we created separate graphical views of the model.
Users can now select “Modelling Relationships”, or “Modelling
Constraints” to view only one type of link.

Analysis
====

Our tool uses several analysis techniques that generate sequences of
satisfaction values which map onto the goal graph. In our previous work
\[2\], analysis results were shown in a separate window without linkage
to the original model. We improved the interface to integrate the
analysis into the original page with another model view. We enable users
to navigate through different time points in the analysis results using
a graphical slider. This allows stakeholders to see how all elements on
the graph evolve over time.

Based on the types of questions users wish to answer, GrowingLeaf
performs different analysis techniques. For example, in a chaotic
environment that has constantly changing variables, the user may use
stochastic simulation to explore different possible states of the model.
In more controlled environments, the user may use constraint solving to
examine if there exists a time point where all goals are satisfied.
Furthermore, users are able to stop at any temporal step and select a
different analysis type based on the current state of the graph. This
allows the user to see many different outcomes based on one state of the
goal model (see Figure 4). The users can navigate between these analysis
steps, or merge all analysis values together. In models where there are
multiple outcomes, this feature makes comparing results easier.

<p style="text-align: center;">
<img style="margin:50" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/gs-fig4.png"/>
</p>

<p style="text-align:center;font-size:0.95rem"><b>Figure 4:</b> City goal model analysis</p>


Querying is a feature that allows users to probe their model by
selecting any two intentions. Our analysis determines the temporal
relationship between the selected intentions. In other words, it allows
the user to find out whether the change in satisfaction value of Goal\_A
happens before Goal\_B, or vice versa. Currently, this feature is still
under development. More back-end work is necessary to finalize the
feature.

Finally, our tool uses Javascript, Python and Java. Javascript is used
on the frontend. Java is used on the backend. Python is used as a
gateway language that facilitates the communication between the frontend
and the backend. Frontend files are built on top of Rappid, a framework
by JointJS \[4\].

Conclusion
====

We have finished the user-interface aspects of these features and
evaluated them on several models. Further work is necessary to evaluate
the usability of our interface and the appropriateness of our approach.

### References

1. E. Yu, “Towards Modeling and Reasoning Support for Early-Phase
Requirements Engineering,” in *Proc. of RE’97*, 1997, pp. 226–235.

2. J. Fear, “Visually Simulating Goal Models over Time,” in *RUCS*,
2015.

3. A. M. Grubb, “Adding temporal intention dynamics to goal modeling:
A position paper,” in *MiSE’15*, 2015.

4. clientIO, “JointjS.” 2015.
